\input{/home/brian/book/preamble.tex}
\input{/home/brian/book/math.tex}
\begin{document}
\doublesp

\section*{Proofs, page ??? photoreceptor.mat Figure???}

Just as we can explain the scotopic color-matching experiment in terms
of the light absorption properties of the rhodopsin photopigment, we
also would like to explain the photopic color-matching experiment in
terms of the light absorption properties of the cone photopigments.
We related the rod photopigment and scotopic matching by studying the
system matrices of the two experiments.  We found that we could
predict when two lights were scotopic matches by measuring the system
matrix of the scotopic matching experiment, $\Scotopic$.  Then, we
showed that the entries in the $1 \times \nl$ scotopic matching
matrix, $\Scotopic$, were the same as the rhodopsin absorption
function $\Rhodopsin$.

For photopic vision, we use the same general approach, but there are
two complications.  There are three cone photopigments, not just one;
the photopic matching matrix is not unique.  Extending the analysis to
account for three cone photopigments instead of one rod photopigment
is straightforward.  We measure the absorption properties of each of
the three cone photopigments, and we create a $3 \times \nl$ cone
absorption system matrix, $\Iodopsin$, whose three rows contain the
three cone photopigment absorption functions.  This matrix generalizes
the rhodopsin system matrix $\Rhodopsin$, and we use it to predict the
cone absorptions, ${\bf c} = (L,M,S)$ by multiplying the test light
times the cone absorption system matrix, namely ${\bf c} = \Iodopsin
\test$. Expressed in matrix tableau this is:
\begin{equation}
  \left ( 
   \begin{array}{c}
    L \\
    M \\
    S \\
   \end{array}
   \right ) =
  \left ( 
   \begin{array}{c}
     \mbox{``Spectral sensitivity of L photopigment''} \\
     \mbox{``Spectral sensitivity of M photopigment''} \\
     \mbox{``Spectral sensitivity of S photopigment''} \\
   \end{array}
  \right )
  \left (
   \begin{array}{c}
    \testi{1} \\
    \testi{2} \\
    \vdots \\
    \testi{\nl-1} \\
    \testi{\nl} \\
   \end{array}
  \right )
\end{equation}

To verify that color-matching can be explained by the properties of
the cone absorptions, we must compare the cone absorption system
matrix, $\Iodopsin$, with the color-matching experiment system matrix,
$\Photopic$.  The cone absorptions can explain the color-matching
results only if the two matrices are related by a linear transformation.

\end{document}
